fjord-notice (#739)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/builders/notices/fjord-changes.mdx

*   Parameter changes:
    *   [Max sequencer drift](https://specs.optimism.io/fjord/derivation.html#constant-maximum-sequencer-drift) becomes a constant with value increased to 1800 seconds
    *   10x increased values for `MAX_RLP_BYTES_PER_CHANNEL`  and  `MAX_CHANNEL_BANK_SIZE`  ([spec](https://specs.optimism.io/fjord/derivation.html#increasing-max_rlp_bytes_per_channel-and-max_channel_bank_size))
*   The [Fjord hardfork activation block](https://specs.optimism.io/fjord/derivation.html#network-upgrade-automation-transactions) includes several transactions to perform all L2 contract deployments, upgrades, enablements, and proxy updates.
*   L1 Gas Cost changes:
    *   `getL1GasUsed` method of the `GasPriceOracle` contract ([spec](https://specs.optimism.io/fjord/predeploys.html#l1-gas-usage-estimation)) is being deprecated
    *   the GPO gets a new function `getL1FeeUpperBound` as a cheap new way to calculate an upper bound for the max fee of a new transaction

>     *   `L1GasUsed` field of the transaction receipt ([spec](https://specs.optimism.io/fjord/exec-engine.html)) is being deprecated

Reviewer: similarly, FastLZ and "L1 Gas Cost changes" shouldn't be separated, as they are the same overall change

Author: updated

## For Wallets and Front-End Developers

The proposed Fjord upgrade to the OP Stack and OP Mainnet changes the formula for estimating the [L1 Data Fee](/stack/transactions/fees#l1-data-fee) component of the [OP Stack Transaction Fee](/stack/transactions/fees).

*   `getL1Fee` on the [GasPriceOracle contract](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/0dcb1b2c7dadec98a24f47e2e2d781a25800d9e1/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/GasPriceOracle.sol#L54) has been updated. It now performs FastLZ compression on-chain, which is a better approximation of the compressibility of a transaction. Combined with a linear regression model, this gives a more accurate prediction of L1 data fees.
*   `getL1GasUsed` and the corresponding `L1GasUsed` field of transaction receipts are being deprecated as they no longer accurately reflect gas usage as of Ecotone. The function and field will remain; however, their usefulness is limited as they still assume calldata batching. `getL1Fee` should be used when trying to predict L1 Data fees.

> *   `getL1FeeUpperBound` is a new method to estimate fee upper bounds when sending transactions. It is much cheaper, in gas costs, than previous methods. This is what wallets and front-ends should probably use in practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   `getL1FeeUpperBound` is a new method to estimate fee upper bounds when sending transactions. It is much cheaper, in gas costs, than previous methods. This is what wallets and front-ends should use in practice in most cases.
```

Your application may need to be updated to account for this change. Read below to learn how you can prepare for the Fjord upgrade.

### Preparing Your Wallet or Front-End

Changes to the L1 Data Fee formula may affect your application if you are computing this fee component on your own. It's strongly recommended that you use [existing tooling](/builders/app-developers/transactions/estimates#tooling) to estimate transaction fees instead of computing them yourself.

*   If you cannot use existing tooling, use the `getL1Fee` function on the `GasPriceOracle` smart contract to compute the L1 Data Fee component of the transaction fee. Avoid implementing the formula yourself, as it may change in the future.

> *   Alternatively, you might consider using `getL1FeeUpperBound` if you need to estimate the transaction fee and also need to compute the correct value to set when sending transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Alternatively, you should consider using `getL1FeeUpperBound` if you only need to estimate an upper bound of the L1 fee for the purpose of transaction sending.
```

  </Callout>

  For custom chains not included in the [`superchain-registry`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/chainids.json), you will need to manually configure the [activation timestamp](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/mainnet/superchain.yaml). You have two configuration options for your sequencer node:

  *   **Option 1:** In your  `rollup.json`  config file, set `L2GenesisFjordTimeOffset` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` with the UNIX timestamp.
  *   **Option 2:** Alternatively, chain operators can use the override flags to configure your sequencer node by specifying a time in the future when Fjord will activate.
      *   Set  `override.fjord`  in both `op-node` and `op-geth` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork or corresponding env vars for this.
      *   In general, run `op-node --help` or `op-geth --help` to see flags, their descriptions and env vars

> 

Reviewer: We could add an item here saying that node operators (both sequencers and normal node operators) should confirm in the startup logs of their op-node and op-geth that the correct Fjord activation timestamps are set.

Author: callout added

  ### Prepare Batcher

>   Prepare your batcher to be restarted with the updated configuration in advance of the Fjord activation. You will also need to activate Brotli compression for the batcher.

Reviewer: This sounds as if it's two separate things
```suggestion
  Prepare your batcher to activate Brotli compression. This step is optional but recommended to achieve better channel compression.
```

  *   Run the batcher help to see available options:  `go run ./op-batcher/cmd --help |less`

  ```jsx
  --compression-algo value (default: zlib) ($OP_BATCHER_COMPRESSION_ALGO)
  The compression algorithm to use. Valid options: zlib, brotli, brotli-9,
  brotli-10, brotli-11

>   ```

Reviewer: I would move this as second item, because it's not a real step to take, but more of an information.

Author: done

>   *   Activate Brotli compression for your batcher. `brotli-10` is the default and works fine for most chain configurations, but chain operators can experiment with `brotli-11` if it gives them better compression and their batcher can still keep up with the increased compression computation needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *   You can activate Brotli compression for your batcher by setting the `compression-algo` flag. `brotli-10` is the recommended Brotli level and works fine for most chain configurations, but chain operators can experiment with `brotli-11` if it gives them better compression and their batcher can still keep up with the increased compression computation needs. `brotli` defaults to `brotli-10`. If the flag is unset, it still defaults to `zlib`.
```

</Steps>

## For Node Operators

Node operators will need to upgrade to Fjord before the activation date. For Sepolia, the op-node release [v1.7.7-rc.1](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-node%2Fv1.7.7-rc.1) and op-geth release v1.101315.1 contain these changes.

These following steps are necessary for EVERY node operator:

<Steps>
  ### Update to the Latest Release

>   *   [`op-geth`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/tag/v1.101315.1)
>   *   [`op-node`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-node%2Fv1.7.7-rc.1)

Reviewer: I'll finalize releases later today, then we can set
```suggestion
  *   [`op-geth`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/tag/v1.101315.2)
  *   [`op-node`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-node%2Fv1.7.7)
```
which will also contain the mainnet activation times.

  *   Send a `setGasConfig` transaction to `SystemConfig`
  *   Set `BaseFeeScalar` and `BlobBaseFeeScalar` values based on the [Fjord calculator](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1V3CWpeUzXv5Iopw8lBSS8tWoSzyR4PDDwV9cu2kKOrs/edit#gid=186414307)

  ### Prepare Sequencer Node

  <Callout type="warning">
    If you are operating an OP Chain that has an entry in the [`superchain-registry`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/chainids.json), the Fjord activation date is part of the `op-node` and `op-geth` nodes. So, no action is needed for the sequencer after preparing the `SystemConfig` transaction. Please skip to [Step 3: Prepare Batcher](#prepare-batcher).
  </Callout>

  For custom chains not included in the [`superchain-registry`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/chainids.json), you will need to manually configure the [activation timestamp](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/mainnet/superchain.yaml). You have two configuration options for your sequencer node:

>   *   **Option 1:** In your  `rollup.json`  config file, set `L2GenesisFjordTimeOffset` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` with the UNIX timestamp.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/3aeb6bdd3efe798713098f890359513eaaa91522/op-chain-ops/genesis/config.go#L138-L140

>   *   **Option 1:** In your  `rollup.json`  config file, set `L2GenesisFjordTimeOffset` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` with the UNIX timestamp.

Author: oooh, I'm not sure @sebastianst @ZakAyesh for help

>   *   **Option 1:** In your  `rollup.json`  config file, set `L2GenesisFjordTimeOffset` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` with the UNIX timestamp.

Reviewer: there seems to be a mix up of deploy config (using relative offsets) and rollup configs (using absolute timestamps)

>   *   **Option 1:** In your  `rollup.json`  config file, set `L2GenesisFjordTimeOffset` to the UNIX timestamp of the block you want to activate the Fjord hardfork. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` with the UNIX timestamp.

Author: fixed

  ### Prepare Batcher

  Preparing your batcher to activate Brotli compression is optional but recommended to achieve better channel compression.

    *   You can activate Brotli compression for your batcher by setting the `compression-algo` flag. 
        *   `brotli-10` is the recommended Brotli level and works fine for most chain configurations.
        *   However, chain operators can experiment with `brotli-11` if it gives them better compression and their batcher can still keep up with the increased compression computation needs. 

<Callout type="info">
`brotli` defaults to `brotli-10`. If the flag is unset, it still defaults to `zlib`.
</Callout>

*   You can also run the batcher help to see available options:  `go run ./op-batcher/cmd --help |less`

  ```jsx
  --compression-algo value (default: zlib) ($OP_BATCHER_COMPRESSION_ALGO)
  The compression algorithm to use. Valid options: zlib, brotli, brotli-9,
  brotli-10, brotli-11
  ```

</Steps>

<Callout type="info">
To verify proper configuration, chain operators should confirm in the startup logs of their `op-node` and `op-geth` that the correct Fjord activation timestamps are set.
</Callout>

## For Node Operators

> Node operators will need to upgrade to Fjord before the activation date. For Sepolia, the op-node release [v1.7.7-rc.1](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-node%2Fv1.7.7-rc.1) and op-geth release v1.101315.1 contain these changes.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/v1.7.7

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/tag/v1.101315.2

Reviewer 2: These release numbers in the description need to be updated. We need to remove the release candidate version and do the actual release too

Author: updated

<Steps>
  ### Update to the Latest Release

  *   [`op-geth`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/tag/v1.101315.2)
  *   [`op-node`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-node%2Fv1.7.7)

  ### Configure the Fjord Activation Date

  <Callout type="warning">
    If you are operating a node for an OP Chain that has an entry in the [`superchain-registry`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/chainids.json), the Fjord activation date is part of the `op-node` and `op-geth` nodes. So, no action is needed for the sequencer after upgrading to the latest release. Please skip to [Step 3: Verify Your Configuration](#verify-your-configuration).
  </Callout>

  For node operators of custom chains not included in the [`superchain-registry`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/chainids.json), you will need to manually configure the [activation timestamp](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/superchain/configs/mainnet/superchain.yaml). This can be done one of two ways:

>   *   **Option 1:** Set the time in the `rollup.json` (set `fjord_time`) for `op-node`. You will still need to set the `override.fjord` flag in `op-geth` if you use this option.

Reviewer 2: What is `fjord_time`? That is not a field in the rollup.json

Author: @sebastianst @ZakAyesh for clarification

Author: fixed
